We're talking about the free librarians there.
Well, I think so.
Well, I mean, in a sense, the library was a fait accompli and nobody quite knew what the disaster was going to be.
But I think it's partly the union people
I mean, they're the people in a way who I think got Nicholson Baker interested, you know, kept him interested, you know, brought together this group of this famed Edith Cedar group who have held the feet of the city to the fire in an extraordinary way.
I mean, they made people jump.
You know, once his name was locked out and lost his job and...
Really?
Because the first appeal was simply on the grounds of what libraries should be.
But then they started, you know, making the city understand how the money had been spent.
And I think that that's sort of, you know, it's one of those things you couldn't do in advance.
You couldn't have prevented this happening.
A library that holds fewer books in the old library.
It's an amazing business.
But they could have gone away with it, I think, without these people creating a sort of public outrage about it.
How do you think it could have gone away with it?
It could have just been gone, and that would have been eliminated.
Well, and I think so many people, I mean, it's the same with the British Library.
You know, you go to the new library and you find that half the books are still in storage, and everybody shrugs and says, okay.
And people wouldn't have made the discards, but no one would have noticed.
And the fact that, you know, the promise was that all the books would be available immediately disappeared.
I mean, it's the great thing about futurology.
You make these great long-term predictions.
You know, what I was saying last night, it's long-term prophecy and short-term profit.
You know, you grab the bag and get out before anyone notices that all the wonderful things you predicted didn't come to pass.
Do you think this was just terrible planning and you think there was an agenda for me?
Well, I'm sort of, you know, I don't know, I'm not close enough to the city politics and the planning really to know.
I think it's this terrible mixture of, you know, on the one hand incompetence, but also it's so easy to get people to believe, you know, that the future is automatically going to repair all the ills of the past.
You know, you do it with technology, you do it with buildings.
The new building is going to have none of the problems the old building did.
And half the problems are the parts of technological problems, and when the wheel turns, they'll all be solved.
is the notion of supersession.
The future will just write off the past and its problems.
And people believe it.
I suspect that Cathy Simon, who is the architect who works basically on the interiors,
you know, believed in.
Did she ever work in a library before?
Yes, she did the library at Davis, UC Davis, which is a much smaller library and much lower users have it.
It's a nice line.
I mean, you see a lot of the things passed over from one to the other.
But yeah, she's done a lot of public buildings.
I think she did a big thing at... Yeah, so she's not inexperienced in that way.
But I suspect that the measurement of the shelves and things was just constantly fudged.
until in the end they suddenly said, should you really mean we need that number of cells?
We don't have room.
Do you think that books were a secondary consideration to an incidental?
I suspect, I mean incidental is perhaps unfair, but secondary I would think so.
I mean I think in a way the notion of public space
and all those fairly laudable aims came first.
Have you been to the new parts of the library here yet?
Have you been to the new parts of the library, the Berkeley library?
I mean, it's the same thing.
They're now all on these rolling sets.
Books don't need room, and the more we can minimize the space for books and maximize the space for workstations,
Well, yeah, they didn't take books out of storage when they changed the library here.
They've added some space, but any idea that we're going to have the whole collection in one place...
Well, except that the promise of the city library was that there was a word.
I saw a tape.
Rowan showed me a tape in the future library.
Do you see that tape?
It's lightning.
I mean, it's, uh, Rowan says right there, 2.5 million books.
We're going to have 2.5 million books in this same time.
It's great that it's rare, but it's good.
And the collections are going to be here, and you can't even fit a million books in them.
So tell me a little bit about yourself, biographically, and how it is that we, you know,
Well, I guess we're talking civic assistant libraries and future libraries.
That brings you to Berkeley.
We've got 10 or 15 minutes just to go on your background.
Okay, let me see what I can do.
I came to the state straight out of school.
school, a university in England.
It was Bristol University.
Study English and Philosophy.
And it was a great place because it managed, it began part of my concerns because in my final year it closed down the library in order to move to a new library just because I was trying to work for my final year.
that i um so i came to the states to teach young result job in a high school i stayed on and did a graduate degree in english in st louis or washington university and then i went to new york and worked in publishing for about four years primarily with dover i was a production editor i wasn't a i did
Copy editing freelance, but my real work was actually making physical books appear.
And then, more or less, I met my wife who lives in California, so I moved to California.
or without a job in 1987, 10 years ago.
And I went and through my wife I met Geoff Nunberg and was introduced to Xerox and Xerox cars.
I went down there and got a foot of jobs.
you know, writing this American thinking, you know, ponderous and brown thoughts.
There's a world of sort of technicians that has this slight awe of people who think about things in other ways.
They don't necessarily pay attention to them, but they have a certain irreverence.
And so I became one of those people.
then began to work with the guy who's the head of the research center john brown and he and i have written papers over 10 years together and um and i worked with jeff as well and that way i came to deal with the
the materiality of objects, in a sense.
While everyone was saying, we can digitize this, we can digitize that, you know, we'll put it on this, I kept saying, well, no, there's actually something important about the material nature of objects.
And even actually when you have, you know, words on the screen, the screen and the interface all play a role in how you understand it, it isn't just the ASCII text dribbling across.
No, there are claims by people like me.
i guess i mean yeah there are now more and more people who are studying the notion of genre in relation to technological forms and my claim was to say it's not only a question of genre but genre particularly with the forms that we know is not just you know the the um what can you say the formulaic nature of a text but actually it's material you understand a particular book
because it's, you know, in hard covers, and it's got Oxford University Press on the imprint, and it weighs a certain amount, and the paper has a certain layout, and all those things are part of genre.
Are you familiar with a book called Powering Texts?
Yeah, yeah.
I'm reading it on the way up.
Which is interesting, yeah.
Ken Carpenter, this one is Ken Carpenter, who's a character who basically...
He supervises the selection books to go out to the Harvard Plus for it.
And I said, well, one of the criteria, he's telling me the criteria, various criteria.
They're serious.
I don't think it's very serious.
These aren't even books that they're getting rid of.
They're just books that are going to be taken out of Cambridge and put in at a 34 miles to Southland.
And he's describing all the factors.
But he said, read a book called Paratext.
Of course, it's sold off.
I mean, only in Harvard Square, maybe Berkeley.
I had an order and finally bought it on Reddit.
I've been reading it on the web.
But he takes the physicality of the paratextual elements into account.
It is, it's very much, yeah.
He takes these factors into account.
He's deciding what a book.
I mean, it's not just a part of it.
Right.
And we all do.
I mean,
We all know how to scan bookshelves.
You know, any sophisticated or moderately sophisticated reader doesn't stand in a bookstore and read every title as they go along.
You do this quick scanning of what it looks like, how it's presented, and what.
And, uh, scans.
So one of the things I tried to say, zero, is to do endless, um,
have endless high-speed printers with internal binding, and they always ignore the spine.
The spine is what most of us spend our lives looking at.
Zero.
Who have this huge business invested in high-speed, low-run printing and binding.
and they always think well we can spiral bind it at the end or we can stick a bit of black tape on the end and you say but people spend their lives looking at the sound the cover is irrelevant yeah absolutely i mean i worked in i was in london i worked for four years running a bookshop and you realize that nearly every book is designed
to go, as they say in the trade, face forward.
But in fact, they spend all their lives fine hours.
And so I began a small publishing company, and we sort of focused on how to make this fine stand out, because you realize, particularly for a small publishing company,
You never get the luxury of being in a dump bin with the face of the book show.
Look at the spine of my book.
It is so striking.
We actually were going to make the book work just out of the spine.
How do we need?
I haven't.
Have you seen my book?
It's an exquisite.
Who did the design?
I chose the artist.
Yeah, so they put some money in there.
They put some money in there.
It sounds like they're getting their money back, too.
Yeah.
And when the advances don't have them, you know, on their own record, they only had a $15,000 advance fund.
And, of course, putting the $6,300 copies, you know, up to $16,000 copies in credit.
That's the whole thing.
So the publisher has a $35 book.
Yeah, well, that's amazing.
So the publisher, like, $1.6 million or something like that.
But it sounds like they just sort of put themselves behind it a bit, which is great.
I mean, because, you know, so often now... I mean, I was in the contract.
It makes a huge difference, you know, and that's the way publicists make or break things.
And even in the design, I mean, you know, those who just stick another...
Well that to me is a real testament because
You know, it's easy to reprint a book and say we're keeping you in the market, but actually to do that before the book is out there, and in a sense say we're committing ourselves to this,
just as you have done as the author, you know, not knowing what might happen, is a big difference.
This is wonderful.
Very good, yeah, good time again.
So let's go back.
So anyway, so that's just the sort of line that I was peddling down there, you know, ten years ago.
You're a consultant.
I'm a consultant, so I'm entirely freelance.
You may understand.
Right, right.
So what is your answer?
Well...
i mean i think what i was trying to say in a sense is that this this notion of the you know the material properties affecting your understanding of uh what would be regarded as the standard content
It's something that I've learned from books and that can be transposed across to the design of machines and technologies in general.
But all forms of communicative artefact are not irrelevant of material design.
So it was a series of questions and essays about design which in some ways interested them because for them design is a huge question.
How do you design?
a print or a photocopier, you know, how do you deal with these things that are dealing with text?
And now you're going to have these future photocopiers that are going to be rearranging text as you photocopy them.
The digital photocopier will no longer make a true copy.
You can alter it, you know, if you have a five-page book and you want it to copy down to a single, say, eight and a half hour eleven, it'll do it for you.
So there are lots of questions about design and what effect that will have and if that will be useful or entirely confusing.
So I think that they like to lend an ear to what's going on in that direction, even if they don't necessarily pay direct attention to it.
Yeah, I don't know, I think it's... I mean, you know, Zerg's project has placed a board in anthropologists, you know, 15 years ago to understand how people use objects.
They've always had this slightly wacky, you know, and they've had these artists in residence programs down there, so...
It's one of the sort of founding institutions of Silicon Valley.
I mean, Hewlett Packard is the real granddaddy.
Xerox Park is the place where they designed the Macintosh.
All the features that came out into Macintosh and Windows were first designed at Xerox.
and Xerox never knew how to bring them to market and so Steve Jobs, you probably know the story, he went there one day and looked around and he saw this stuff and said, Christ, we can make millions with this and created the Macintosh.
But it was all Xerox stuff.
I mean, our Windows is going to further knock off and if you look at the Microsoft stuff,
You know, Word, Excel, the drawing programs, they're all basically zero-op programs rewritten.
They just didn't know how to do it commercially.
So there's a book even somewhere called something like How Zero-op's Fumbled the Future.
Which is sort of saying, look, these guys had everything that they've never made any money from.
Fumbled, I think.
That may be the subtitle, in case I can't remember the title.
So how would you describe yourself in Berkeley?
I never know.
The great thing about coming to California is I discovered this term consultant, which sort of means never having to say you're unemployed.
So I have a half-time research position at Berkeley, nothing to do with this, in another world entirely.
And then I spent half my life also down in Zurich.
writing about, you know, the future of the book or the future of the university or the future of the incorporation, all sort of related questions about, you know, how people tend to think that in the digital world, you know, material objects and also institutions will sort of disappear.
And I guess that, finally, to get there is so hard if I'm interested in the language.
Because people tend to sort of believe, you know, there's me and there's information and I don't need anybody else in between.
So I don't need libraries anymore.
It's all going to be online.
The library doesn't play any role.
The library is simply there to hand out.
you know, these silly material objects that we don't need anymore.
That you're one of these people who wants to believe that a library is a place for the soul.
I mean, it's like... Yeah, yeah.
And that it plays an enormous role in constructing, you know, what you understand and get.
I mean, if you sit on the net trying to interpret the shit that comes over your email now, you know, or, you know, as you sit out, go out on the web, or even in the old days, what you drew over an FTP,
It's impossible.
And so what you tend to need, you know, are institutions that actually, you know, stabilize and interrelate all this junk in libraries that, you know, always prove really good at doing that.
Now, this paper that you said to me that I was finally able to do that, you know, something a little bit about the genesis of that.
Well, I'm actually trying to remember what the Genesis was.
I guess it's working towards an overall book which is going to talk about the continuing importance of institutions in different facets of life.
And so the first paper, which will probably go towards the book, was one called The Social Life of the Document.
which in a sense was saying that documents aren't simply delivery systems, they're part of a social organization of society.
So that in a way was saying that both documents and in a way also publishers as institutions will have a continued existence.
however digital we go, they won't disappear as the sort of wild folks like to predict.
So then the second one was to look at universities and say, again, everybody who wants to talk about, you know, distance learning.
I'm just going to say that the university is going to disappear, we're all going to log on to the internet and they'll get our courses shipped to us online and there'll be no more universities.
So the next paper is to say, in a similar vein, these institutions play a role, a social role, beyond the delivery of information.
And the moment I'm working on is a parallel piece on the corporation and saying that organisations, non-profits and corporates,
are more, again, than just an aggregate of people drawn together, that they too are institutions that have a particular role in society, and digitizing information ain't gonna make them, you know, ain't gonna obliterate them.
You mentioned that in London you had a bookstore, is that right?
Mm-hmm.
And then you worked with a couple of them.
And you were a literature scholar, I think, in the university.
Yeah.
So you must have pretty strong feelings about books.
Books and texts.
Yeah, yeah, and objects.
Yeah.
And do you despair about... Do you despair a lot about wearing books and all the books and...
Well,
Sometimes I do, but I guess I tend to do a little poem, which I've got at Tony's level, that's resisting the virtue of your life.
I guess I don't despair as much as Ian.
I didn't have a lot of time for that book.
There's a wonderful article in there by a woman such a writer.
I can't remember anything about it, but talking about sort of being a woman among the job culture of Silicon Valley.
But I mean sometimes, you know, sometimes I despair and you know occasionally the sort of sadness of
you know, bookstores going out of business and things.
But I think I'm sanguine because I actually think the social forces that hold these things together
are remarkably strong and when technology tries to you know when technologists try to remove these things and wash them away the social reaction response is often much stronger than the technology and so i actually believe books were held together for a long time here and that a lot of people will you know do some fairly ludicrous things to try to destroy them
but that in fact, I'm rather sanguine that what tends to have the technologists is they say, you know, we'll make X and Y will happen and Y doesn't happen because, you know, social forces A, B, C, and D just don't disappear and rush away.
The examples I tend to give when asked about this are sort of trivial, but I think probably, you know, in the 1930s, the New York Times
looked at the typewriter and said, you know, this is the death of the pencil.
Screw the New York Times.
My own example is if you look at any movie about the future,
You know, one of the things that runs from the 1920s onwards is the hinge disappears.
It's a world of sliding doors.
It's how we know we've got into the future.
You don't need those things anymore.
Well, you know, there's sort of comfort in the fact that your portable phone and your laptop computer, let alone your book, still survive on the hinge line.
And for me, you know, the hinge door is this great sort of semiotic invention.
You know, you can slam it.
Oh, I haven't heard that.
Well, in fact, I talk a little bit about the hymns in the essay that I have in the future of the book, the book The Echo and Nunberg and... You have an essay in the future of the book?
Yeah, called Material Matters.
I read it last November.
I think it's expensive loads on it.
I didn't realize it.
I didn't connect the two.
Mine's called Material Matters.
That's quite a book.
I consider that a seminal book.
Yeah, I think it is good.
I like it.
It's very interesting.
Jeff just sent me another review today.
It's got a wonderful range of reviews, which in some sense, I think, reflect the range of...
people inside it.
Elizabeth Eisenstein has just come out with a damning review.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
I just called her a book.
Send me an email message that I can tell you where.
I can't remember offhand where it was.
It was in an academic journal.
But she wouldn't be coming from the other side, though, wouldn't she?
Well, she also disliked very heavily the
the sort of Robert Downs and Paula Husser 18th century revision book culture.
She doesn't really want much to do with that.
It's a sort of problem for her because she wants to say the impact of printing changed the world.
And all these people are saying, well actually you have to wait until the 18th century until these things took effect.
so it couldn't have just been the technology so they're sort of a loggerhead and so and she takes a great deal of review taking color has of the past over what she said about the 18th the first revolution is in the history department
I don't know how I'm going to get all of this into the book.
So the overall book is going to be what I see as Harvard and Cornell.
I told this story last night.
I'm doing research into the... I'm doing some research in the 18th century business documents and records in Portugal.
And I was sitting in this archive, this old stealthy room, with these boxes of letters.
and I was sitting there reading them, and you pull them out, and they're dusty, and I get asthma, and I start to wheeze and sniff.
They're incredibly hard to read, and you just sit there and you say, shit, if somebody had digitized these, and these were online, you know, my life would be heaven, you know.
And the chap's sitting next to me with another box open inside of him, and he was sitting there, and he was putting his hand in, and he was pulling them out, and he was going, and putting them back in.
And so I looked at him, and I said,
You know, let's just tend to be cool.
And I carried on reading.
But he carried on doing this for 50 minutes.
And he said, the inhibitions of my Portuguese just didn't stop.
And I said, what are you doing?
And he said, well, I'm a medical historian.
And I'm interested in when there were outbreaks of cholera in Portugal.
And when cholera came to Porto, the user came in off the ships, so the first thing that they would do if they suspected an outbreak is that they'd disinfect all the letters.
And they would disinfect them with vinegar.
And now, 200 years later, you can still smell vinegar on the records and know when cholera came to Porto.
And so I thought, you know, this is what the material embodiment of information is all about.
Because you could easily have scanned all those letters.
And then I thought to a further, it's actually what the humanities are about.
In a way, the way you work in the humanities, particularly in history, is that you sort of score by saying, I've noticed what you haven't noticed.
You know, this guy's noticed the vinegar, which people have ignored for 200 years, has actually become an enormously significant data source for medical history.
But if someone had said, what's interesting in those documents is what is scammable,
So we'll scan them and destroy the documents.
That peripheral data just disappears because nobody has noticed it.
And the fact that the guy's scanning it says there's a strange smell of vinegar around here.
This is in Portugal, in Porto, which is the city where Porto is made, yeah.
O Porto is using it six months ago.
Yeah.
And what exactly was he looking at?
Well, he was looking at letters that had been sent to an English port wine exporter.
They still exist, Hunt Roof.
And interestingly about studying these people, they've been in business for 15 generations.
Hunt Roof letters, the letters that had come from England to Porter.
The way in which they prevented power from coming in was that they paid the custom guys three mil rays, which is a tiny amount of matter, three rays, per letter to disinfect them.
So these guys would very loudly disinfect them.
And occasionally you'd look and they'd uphold from them because there'd been too much vinegar.
But that was, you know, and so for me, I was reading what the companies in England were saying to the companies, to the wine exporters, you know.
The wine's bad, you're being ripped off.
But this guy was studying medical history from exactly the same record.
But it was a question that if Cornell had got hold of these things and said, screw it, we can put these, you know, 56 huge, heavy, dusty boxes on, you know, a CD-ROM.
You know, that's how I would explain the difference between that.
And I think the next part of this, I'm hoping that the term will return.
That seems bad, by the way.
Some of it's very important.
What they did with the Cambodia is extraordinary.
I don't know how that is.
It's destroying the whole national war.
And it happens at $4 of great, great Southeast Asian luxury stuff.
And they were able to break with the U.S.
stuff and replicate things that were destroyed by the poor U.S.
And it was with the guys' message here.
And I saw other U.S.
And also, I have to get a point of the place.
They're documenting everything that they're doing, they're setting up guidelines, establishing criteria, it's all being documented.
So, you know, like it or love it, you can't say that they're doing it.
No, they are doing it, yeah.
And they're very hard about it.
But they were...
I mean, the thing that you're saying is that they have decided that there is nothing more interesting that can be gained from these volumes than they have managed to catch on a scam.
And that's the great presumption.
We know all there is to know about this document.
There's no need to look back at it again.
Particularly if somebody's making emendations along the way, think of A. L. Rouse's identification of the dark ladies
you know, Shakespeare's sonnets.
So what does he do?
He misreads the text.
You know, Simon Fullman's diary said she was very brave.
He reads it and transcribes it as she was very brown.
And then says, this is the dark lady, and writes the book.
And until someone can actually go back and look at the... I mean, I'm not an asinine piece of work that is.
He's a historian who's read over Shakespearean scholars.
But you see, he always says he knows more than Shakespearean scholars do.
I mean, he's enormously arrogant in what he knows.
Yeah, he's alive.
Yeah, he's an extraordinary figure.
Did he go alive?
Yeah, I could go.
I think that whole thing is, you know, we...
We now can decide what we need to keep from these documents and what to discard.
The great thing about scanning is that probably 90% of the people who ever need those documents will really just want a rough scan of the text, and that's fine.
Scanning is great, but there's nothing implicit in the scanning that says you have to destroy what you scan from.
That's the discount.
I mean, you know, the Goldsmith Press Library has these great microfilms.
And for 90% of what you ever want to do with a book in Goldsmith Press, a microfilm is going to be, you know, 99%, a microfilm is going to be great.
But what if they'd microfilmed the Goldsmith Press collection and said, look, we're pushing the space and have the scarlet and burn the leather there.
Amazing.
That second decision is the one that really is.
In that book there's a future book there.
The feature of the book, yeah.
What do you make of this type of this?
The hypertext?
Yeah.
Something, is it?
Yeah, I mean, it seems to me that, you know, for me the odd thing about hypertext, and in fact I write a bit about it in my essay in there, I sort of slightly take on Landau, is this strange assumption
which in a way I mean you and I know that in a sense that writing is a sort of fundamentally deceptive object and pulling it apart is the real effort that you should put into life.
Whereas the effort of putting it together
is so important in how, you know, it's sort of the same thing as suggesting that, you know, photography is just a matter of remembering to take the lens cap off.
You know, and that writing is this sort of, this veridical reflection of a deceptive world, and what we need to do is break writing up so that nobody believes the world is like that.
Which seems to me such a profound misunderstanding of what narrative is about.
I mean, even what you were saying a few minutes ago, is that there's a way that you want to tell a story, because in the way you tell it, you know, there are certain ends that you can achieve.
And then it's, you know, it's a choice of methods, and, you know, narrative plays that role.
I mean, this transcript of this interview, I don't know what I can say here.
No way I'm going to use it.
Of everybody here.
There's a sergeant process.
And that's my only set of standards.
And where I think, you know, where hypertexts can do great things is if, you know, you're not going to do this, but where, you know, the story on cocaine and the San Jose Mercury, you have a narrative story and then you have links.
to a broad hypertext database of the data from which you constructed the story.
Well, that's great, it seems to me.
But the notion that you just do away with narrative and leave everybody with this unrefined job, and that you're helping anybody out, or achieving anything of any significance, just seems to me bonkers.
Just seems to me absolutely bonkers.
You may not remember me, but... He did, because I said I was going to meet you.
Yeah, he did.
Yeah, and he'd read the book, too.
I did, I did.
And enjoyed it.
That was an excellent interview I had with about an hour and a half.
Yeah, it was very similar to that.
That would be great.
Yes.
i get an interview of marie sunday cambridge collection of the cycle adversarial which are the books it's in the um
I wish I had a memory that could hold things.
They have kept their collection of their annotated books together as a separate collection.
There's someone who writes about it.
Which again, I can drop down the reference on email.
Thank you.
That's very important.
Yeah, okay, I need the piece of paper.
Yeah, just to remind myself.
They call it the adversarial collection.
Adversarial, the old Latin name for annotations.
Because they're sort of adversarial at a time.
You know, it's interesting to interrupt other annual meetings this summer.
Really?
Yeah, that's right, they do, because I'm on the sharp list.
Adversaria.
Defending in an A, the Latin word.
Yeah.
Um...
And there was something else I said.
No, that was last night.
That was the whole thing of why we had a confusion about last night.
I gave the talks last night.
That was why the class with Melissa... Yeah, I thought you and Melissa had sort of sort of thought about the information futures, where they have the university extension
planned a program for librarians who are sort of concerned with, interested about, you know, what the future holds for them, the future of librarianship, the future of their own collections, you know, how technology is affecting it.
And it'll go on until Wednesday.
Yeah, and so I think today they're spending at the UC Extension in the city and tomorrow they'll be in Berkeley where a number of people from the School of Information Management are giving them different sort of show and tell.
Well, at the moment it's only notes, but I have to write it up for them, so when I do, I'll either send it to you or I'll let you know where it's available online.
Oh, I'm going to deal with it in the next couple of weeks.
Okay.
I mean, there I was talking more about sort of, you know, what to learn from disasters.
Sorry about that.
No, not at all.
Thank you.
I'll send you the reference to the adversary, I think.
There's another... I think we ought to go.
It sounded good.
Maybe it'll come back to me probably.
Yeah, that's in material matters.
But you should, if you can, get in touch with Carla.
Carla has her.
Because she's very interesting.
And what department is she going to do?
She's in the history department.
I'd love to spend all day here like that.